### **Chapter 12. Reflection**

Go provides a mechanism to do the following on variables without knowing their types at compile time:

* Update variables and inspect their values at run time
* Call their methods
* Apply the operations intrinsic to their representation

This mechanism is called [reflection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reflection_(computer_programming)). Reflection also lets us treat types themselves as first-class values.

This chapter covers Go's reflection features on how they increase the expressiveness of the language, and in particular how they are crucial to the implementation of two
important APIs:

* String formatting provided by [`fmt`](https://golang.org/pkg/fmt/)
* Protocol encoding provided by packages like [`encoding/json`](https://golang.org/pkg/encoding/json/) and [`encoding/xml`](https://golang.org/pkg/encoding/xml/)

Reflection is also essential to the template mechanism provided by the [`text/template`](https://golang.org/pkg/text/template/) and [`html/template`](https://golang.org/pkg/html/template/) packages as seen in [Section 4.6](ch4.md#text-and-html-templates). However, reflection is complex to reason about and not for casual use, so although these packages are implemented using reflection, they do not expose reflection in their own APIs.

### Why Reflection?

Sometimes we need to write a function capable of dealing uniformly with values of types, which have one of the following traits:

* They don't satisfy a common interface,
* They don't have a known representation,
* They don't exist at the time we design the function,
* All three of above.

A familiar example is the formatting logic within `fmt.Fprintf`, which can usefully print an arbitrary value of any type, even a user-defined one. Let's try to implement a function like it using what we know already. For simplicity, our function will accept one argument and will return the result as a string like `fmt.Sprint` does, so we'll call it `Sprint`.

We start with a type switch that tests whether the argument defines a `String` method and call it if so. We then add switch cases that test the values' dynamic type against each of the basic types: `string`, `int`, `bool`, etc., and perform the appropriate formatting operation in each case.

```go
func Sprint(x interface{}) string {
	type stringer interface {
		String() string
	}
	switch x := x.(type) {
	case stringer:
		return x.String()
	case string:
		return x
	case int:
		return strconv.Itoa(x)
	// ...similar cases for int16, uint32, and so on...
	case bool:
	if x {
		return "true"
		}
		return "false"
	default:
		// array, chan, func, map, pointer, slice, struct
		return "???"
	}
}
```

But how do we deal with other types?

* Types like `[]float64`, `map[string][]string`: we can add more cases, but the number of such types is infinite.
* Named types like [`url.Values`](https://golang.org/pkg/net/url/#Values): even if the type switch had a case for its underlying type `map[string][]string`, it wouldn't match `url.Values` because the two types are not identical, and the type switch cannot include a case for each type like `url.Values` because that would require this library to depend upon its clients.

Without a way to inspect the representation of values of unknown types, we quickly get stuck.  What we need is reflection.

### `reflect.Type` and `reflect.Value`

Reflection is provided by the [`reflect`](https://golang.org/pkg/reflect/) package. It defines two important types, [`Type`](https://golang.org/pkg/reflect/#Type) and [`Value`](https://golang.org/pkg/reflect/#Value). A `Type` represents a Go type. It is an interface with many methods for discriminating among types and inspecting their components, like the fields of a struct or the parameters of a function. The sole implementation of `reflect.Type` is the type descriptor ([Section 7.5](ch7.md#interface-values)), the same entity that identifies the dynamic type of an interface value.

The [`reflect.TypeOf`](https://golang.org/pkg/reflect/#TypeOf) function accepts any `interface{}` and returns its dynamic type as a `reflect.Type`:

```go
t := reflect.TypeOf(3)  // a reflect.Type
fmt.Println(t.String()) // "int"
fmt.Println(t)          // "int"
```

The `TypeOf(3)` call above assigns the value 3 to the `interface{}` parameter. Recall from [Section 7.5](ch7.md#interface-values) that an assignment from a concrete value to an interface type performs an implicit interface conversion, which creates an interface value consisting of two components:

* Its dynamic type is the operand's type (`int`)
* Its dynamic value is the operand's value (3)

Because `reflect.TypeOf` returns an interface value's dynamic type, it always returns a concrete type. For example, the code below prints "`*os.File`", not "`io.Writer`". Later, we will see that `reflect.Type` is also capable of representing interface types.

```go
var w io.Writer = os.Stdout
fmt.Println(reflect.TypeOf(w)) // "*os.File"
```

Notice that `reflect.Type` satisfies `fmt.Stringer`. Because printing the dynamic type of an interface value is useful for debugging and logging, `fmt.Printf` provides a shorthand, `%T`, that uses `reflect.TypeOf` internally:

```go
fmt.Printf("%T\n", 3) // "int"
```

The other important type in the `reflect` package is `Value`. A `reflect.Value` can hold a value of any type. The `reflect.ValueOf` function accepts any `interface{}` and returns a `reflect.Value` containing the interface's dynamic value. As with `reflect.TypeOf`, the results of `reflect.ValueOf` are always concrete, but a `reflect.Value` can also hold interface values.

```go
v := reflect.ValueOf(3) // a reflect.Value
fmt.Println(v)          // "3"
fmt.Printf("%v\n", v)   // "3"
fmt.Println(v.String()) // NOTE: "<int Value>"
```

Like `reflect.Type`, `reflect.Value` also satisfies `fmt.Stringer`, but <u>unless the `Value` holds a string, the result of the `String` method reveals only the type. Instead, use the `fmt` package's `%v` verb, which treats `reflect.Value`s specially.</u>

Calling the [`Type`](https://golang.org/pkg/reflect/#Value.Type) method on a `Value` returns its type as a `reflect.Type`:

```go
t := v.Type()            // a reflect.Type
fmt.Println(t.String())  // "int"
```

The inverse operation to `reflect.ValueOf` is the [`reflect.Value.Interface`](https://golang.org/pkg/reflect/#Value.Interface) method. It returns an `interface{}` holding the same concrete value as the `reflect.Value`:

```go
v := reflect.ValueOf(3) // a reflect.Value
x := v.Interface()      // an interface{}
i := x.(int)            // an int
fmt.Printf("%d\n", i)   // "3"
```

A `reflect.Value` and an `interface{}` (empty interface) can both hold arbitrary values. What is the difference between them?

* An empty interface hides the representation and intrinsic operations of the value it holds and exposes none of its methods, so unless we know its dynamic type and use a type assertion to peer inside it (as we did above), there is little we can do to the value within.
* In contrast, a `Value` has many methods for inspecting its contents, regardless of its type.

Let's use the methods of a `Value` for our second attempt at a general formatting function called `format.Any`.

Instead of a type switch, we use `reflect.Value`'s `Kind` method to discriminate the cases. Although there are infinitely many types, there are only a finite number of *kinds* of type:

* The basic types `Bool`, `String`, and all the numbers
* The aggregate types `Array` and `Struct`
* The reference types `Chan`, `Func`, `Ptr`, `Slice`, and `Map`
* `Interface` types
* `Invalid`, meaning no value at all (The zero value of a `reflect.Value` has kind `Invalid`.)

<small>[gopl.io/ch12/format/format.go](https://github.com/shichao-an/gopl.io/blob/master/ch12/format/format.go)</small>

```go
package format

import (
	"reflect"
	"strconv"
)

// Any formats any value as a string.
func Any(value interface{}) string {
	return formatAtom(reflect.ValueOf(value))
}

// formatAtom formats a value without inspecting its internal structure.
func formatAtom(v reflect.Value) string {
	switch v.Kind() {
	case reflect.Invalid:
		return "invalid"
	case reflect.Int, reflect.Int8, reflect.Int16,
		reflect.Int32, reflect.Int64:
		return strconv.FormatInt(v.Int(), 10)
	case reflect.Uint, reflect.Uint8, reflect.Uint16,
		reflect.Uint32, reflect.Uint64, reflect.Uintptr:
		return strconv.FormatUint(v.Uint(), 10)
	// ...floating-point and complex cases omitted for brevity...
	case reflect.Bool:
		return strconv.FormatBool(v.Bool())
	case reflect.String:
		return strconv.Quote(v.String())
	case reflect.Chan, reflect.Func, reflect.Ptr, reflect.Slice, reflect.Map:
		return v.Type().String() + " 0x" +
			strconv.FormatUint(uint64(v.Pointer()), 16)
	default: // reflect.Array, reflect.Struct, reflect.Interface
		return v.Type().String() + " value"
	}
}
```

This function treats each value as an indivisible thing with no internal structure (hence `formatAtom`). For aggregate types (structs and arrays) and interfaces it prints only the type of the value, and for reference types (channels, functions, pointers, slices, and maps), it prints the type and the reference address in hexadecimal. This is less than ideal but still a major improvement. Since `Kind` is concerned only with the underlying representation, `format.Any` also works for named types. For example:

```go
var x int64 = 1
var d time.Duration = 1 * time.Nanosecond
fmt.Println(format.Any(x))                  // "1"
fmt.Println(format.Any(d))                  // "1"
fmt.Println(format.Any([]int64{x}))         // "[]int64 0x8202b87b0"
fmt.Println(format.Any([]time.Duration{d})) // "[]time.Duration 0x8202b87e0"
```

### `Display`, a Recursive Value Printer

This section is about how to improve the display of composite types. Rather than try to copy `fmt.Sprint` exactly, we'll build a debugging utility function called `Display` that, given an arbitrarily complex value `x`, prints the complete structure of that value, labeling each element with the path by which it was found.

```go
e, _ := eval.Parse("sqrt(A / pi)")
Display("e", e)
```

In the call above, the argument to `Display` is a syntax tree from the expression evaluator in [Section 7.9](ch7.md#example-expression-evaluator). `eval.Parse` is from [gopl.io/ch7/eval/parse.go](https://github.com/shichao-an/gopl.io/blob/master/ch7/eval/parse.go#L59).

The output of `Display` is shown below:

```text
Display e (eval.call):
e.fn = "sqrt"
e.args[0].type = eval.binary
e.args[0].value.op = 47
e.args[0].value.x.type = eval.Var
e.args[0].value.x.value = "A"
e.args[0].value.y.type = eval.Var
e.args[0].value.y.value = "pi"
```

Where possible, you should avoid exposing reflection in the API of a package. We'll define an unexported function `display` to do the real work of the recursion, and export `Display`, a simple wrapper around it that accepts an `interface{}` parameter:

<small>[gopl.io/ch12/display/display.go](https://github.com/shichao-an/gopl.io/blob/master/ch12/display/display.go)</small>

```go
func Display(name string, x interface{}) {
	fmt.Printf("Display %s (%T):\n", name, x)
	display(name, reflect.ValueOf(x))
}
```

`display` uses the `formatAtom` function defined earlier to print elementary values, e.g.  basic types, functions, and channels, but uses the methods of `reflect.Value` to recursively display each component of a more complex type. As the recursion descends, the `path` string, which initially describes the starting value (for instance, `"e"`), will be augmented to indicate how we reached the current value (for instance, `"e.args[0].value"`).

```go
func display(path string, v reflect.Value) {
	switch v.Kind() {
	case reflect.Invalid:
		fmt.Printf("%s = invalid\n", path)
	case reflect.Slice, reflect.Array:
		for i := 0; i < v.Len(); i++ {
			display(fmt.Sprintf("%s[%d]", path, i), v.Index(i))
		}
	case reflect.Struct:
		for i := 0; i < v.NumField(); i++ {
			fieldPath := fmt.Sprintf("%s.%s", path, v.Type().Field(i).Name)
			display(fieldPath, v.Field(i))
		}
	case reflect.Map:
		for _, key := range v.MapKeys() {
			display(fmt.Sprintf("%s[%s]", path,
				formatAtom(key)), v.MapIndex(key))
		}
	case reflect.Ptr:
		if v.IsNil() {
			fmt.Printf("%s = nil\n", path)
		} else {
			display(fmt.Sprintf("(*%s)", path), v.Elem())
		}
	case reflect.Interface:
		if v.IsNil() {
			fmt.Printf("%s = nil\n", path)
		} else {
			fmt.Printf("%s.type = %s\n", path, v.Elem().Type())
			display(path+".value", v.Elem())
		}
	default: // basic types, channels, funcs
		fmt.Printf("%s = %s\n", path, formatAtom(v))
	}
}
```

In the above code:

* **Slices and arrays:** The logic is the same for both. The `Len` method returns the number of elements of a slice or array value, and `Index(i)` retrieves the element at index `i`, also as a `reflect.Value`; it panics if `i` is out of bounds. These are analogous to the built-in `len(a)` and `a[i]` operations on sequences. The `display` function recursively invokes itself on each element of the sequence, appending the subscript notation `"[i]"` to the path.
    * Although `reflect.Value` has many methods, only a few are safe to call on any given value.

* **Structs**: The `NumField` method reports the number of fields in the struct, and `Field(i)` returns the value of the *i*-th field as a `reflect.Value`. The list of fields includes ones promoted from anonymous fields. To append the field selector notation `".f"` to the path, we must obtain the `reflect.Type` of the struct and access the name of its *i*-th field.
* **Maps**: The `MapKeys` method returns a slice of `reflect.Value`s, one per map key. As usual when iterating over a map, the order is undefined. `MapIndex(key)` returns the value corresponding to `key`. We append the subscript notation `"[key]"` to the path. (We're cutting a corner here. The type of a map key isn't restricted to the types `formatAtom` handles best; arrays, structs, and interfaces can also be valid map keys.)
* **Pointers**: The `Elem` method returns the variable pointed to by a pointer as a `reflect.Value`. This operation would be safe even if the pointer value is `nil`, in which case the result would have kind `Invalid`, but we use `IsNil` to detect nil pointers explicitly so we can print a more appropriate message. We prefix the path with a `"*"` and parenthesize it to avoid ambiguity.
* **Interfaces**: `IsNil` is used to test whether the interface is nil, and if not, we retrieve its dynamic value using `v.Elem()` and print its type and value.

Let's use `Display` on some example types. The `Movie` type below is a slight variation on the one in [Section 4.5](ch4.md#json):

```go
type Movie struct {
	Title, Subtitle string
	Year            int
	Color           bool
	Actor           map[string]string
	Oscars          []string
	Sequel          *string
}
```

Let's declare a value of this type and see what `Display` does with it:

```go
strangelove := Movie{
	Title:    "Dr. Strangelove",
	Subtitle: "How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb",
	Year:     1964,
	Color:    false,
	Actor: map[string]string{
		"Dr. Strangelove":            "Peter Sellers",
		"Grp. Capt. Lionel Mandrake": "Peter Sellers",
		"Pres. Merkin Muffley":       "Peter Sellers",
		"Gen. Buck Turgidson":        "George C. Scott",
		"Brig. Gen. Jack D. Ripper":  "Sterling Hayden",
		`Maj. T.J. "King" Kong`:      "Slim Pickens",
	},
	Oscars: []string{
		"Best Actor (Nomin.)",
		"Best Adapted Screenplay (Nomin.)",
		"Best Director (Nomin.)",
		"Best Picture (Nomin.)",
	},
}
```

The call `Display("strangelove", strangelove)` prints:

```text
Display strangelove (display.Movie):
strangelove.Title = "Dr. Strangelove"
strangelove.Subtitle = "How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb"
strangelove.Year = 1964
strangelove.Color = false
strangelove.Actor["Gen. Buck Turgidson"] = "George C. Scott"
strangelove.Actor["Brig. Gen. Jack D. Ripper"] = "Sterling Hayden"
strangelove.Actor["Maj. T.J. \"King\" Kong"] = "Slim Pickens"
strangelove.Actor["Dr. Strangelove"] = "Peter Sellers"
strangelove.Actor["Grp. Capt. Lionel Mandrake"] = "Peter Sellers"
strangelove.Actor["Pres. Merkin Muffley"] = "Peter Sellers"
strangelove.Oscars[0] = "Best Actor (Nomin.)"
strangelove.Oscars[1] = "Best Adapted Screenplay (Nomin.)"
strangelove.Oscars[2] = "Best Director (Nomin.)"
strangelove.Oscars[3] = "Best Picture (Nomin.)"
strangelove.Sequel = nil
```

We can use `Display` to display the internals of library types, such as `*os.File`:

```go
Display("os.Stderr", os.Stderr)
// Output:
// Display os.Stderr (*os.File):
// (*(*os.Stderr).file).fd = 2
// (*(*os.Stderr).file).name = "/dev/stderr"
// (*(*os.Stderr).file).nepipe = 0
```

Notice that even unexported fields are visible to reflection. Beware that the particular output of this example may vary across platforms and may change over time as libraries evolve. (Those fields are private for a reason.)

We can even apply `Display` to a `reflect.Value` and watch it traverse the internal representation of the type descriptor for `*os.File`. The output of the call `Display("rV", reflect.ValueOf(os.Stderr))` is shown below (though your output may vary:

```text
Display rV (reflect.Value):
(*rV.typ).size = 8
(*rV.typ).hash = 871609668
(*rV.typ).align = 8
(*rV.typ).fieldAlign = 8
(*rV.typ).kind = 22
(*(*rV.typ).string) = "*os.File"
(*(*(*rV.typ).uncommonType).methods[0].name) = "Chdir"
(*(*(*(*rV.typ).uncommonType).methods[0].mtyp).string) = "func() error"
(*(*(*(*rV.typ).uncommonType).methods[0].typ).string) = "func(*os.File) error"
...
```

Observe the difference between the following two examples:

```go
var i interface{} = 3
Display("i", i)
// Output:
// Display i (int):
// i = 3

Display("&i", &i)
// Output:
// Display &i (*interface {}):
// (*&i).type = int
// (*&i).value = 3
```

* In the first example, `Display` calls `reflect.ValueOf(i)`, which returns a value of kind `Int`.  As we mentioned in [Section 12.2](#reflecttype-and-reflectvalue), `reflect.ValueOf` always returns a `Value` of a concrete type since it extracts the contents of an interface value.
* In the second example, `Display` calls `reflect.ValueOf(&i)`, which returns a pointer to `i`, of kind `Ptr`. The switch case for `Ptr` calls `Elem` on this value, which returns a `Value` representing the variable `i` itself, of kind `Interface`. A `Value` obtained indirectly like this one may represent any value at all, including interfaces. The `display` function calls itself recursively and this time, it prints separate components for the interface's dynamic type and value.

As currently implemented, `Display` will never terminate if it encounters a cycle in the object graph, such as this linked list that eats its own tail:

```go
// a struct that points to itself
type Cycle struct{ Value int; Tail *Cycle }
var c Cycle
c = Cycle{42, &c}
Display("c", c)
```

`Display` prints this ever-growing expansion:

```go
Display c (display.Cycle):
c.Value = 42
(*c.Tail).Value = 42
(*(*c.Tail).Tail).Value = 42
(*(*(*c.Tail).Tail).Tail).Value = 42
...ad infinitum...
```

Many Go programs contain at least some cyclic data. Making `Display` robust against such cycles is tricky, requiring additional bookkeeping to record the set of references that have been followed so far (which is also costly). A general solution requires `unsafe` language features, as we will see in [Section 13.3](ch13.md#example-deep-equivalence).

Cycles pose less of a problem for `fmt.Sprint` because it rarely tries to print the complete structure. For example, when it encounters a pointer, it breaks the recursion by printing the pointer's numeric value. It can get stuck trying to print a slice or map that contains itself as an element, but such rare cases do not warrant the considerable extra trouble of handling cycles.
