### **Chapter 14. The Block I/O Layer**

**Block devices** are hardware devices distinguished by the random (not necessarily sequential) access of fixed-size chunks of data. The fixed-size chunks of data are called **blocks**. The most common block device is a hard disk, but many other block devices exist, such as floppy drives, Blu-ray readers, and flash memory. Notice how these are all devices on which you mount a filesystem; filesystems are the lingua franca of block devices.

The other basic type of device is a **character device**. Character devices, or *char* devices, are accessed as a stream of sequential data, one byte after another. Example character devices are serial ports and keyboards.

#### Character Device vs. Block Device *

<u>If the hardware device is accessed as a stream of data, it is implemented as a character device. On the other hand, if the device is accessed randomly (nonsequentially), it is a block device.</u>

The difference comes down to whether the device accesses data randomly, in other words, whether the device can *seek* to one position from another. [p289]

* As a driver, the keyboard provides a stream of data. The keyboard driver is thus a char device; the device provides a stream of characters that the user types onto the keyboard.
* A hard drive, conversely, is quite different. The hard drive’s driver might ask to read the contents of one arbitrary block and then read the contents of a different block; the blocks need not be consecutive. The hard disk’s data is accessed randomly, and not as a stream; therefore, the hard disk is a block device.

Managing block devices in the kernel requires more care, preparation, and work than managing character devices. <u>Character devices have only one position, the current one, whereas block devices must be able to navigate back and forth between any location on the media.</u>

The kernel does not have to provide an entire subsystem dedicated to the management of character devices, but block devices receive exactly that. Such a subsystem is a necessity partly because of the complexity of block devices. A large reason for such extensive support is that block devices are quite performance sensitive; getting every last drop out of your hard disk is much more important than squeezing an extra percent of speed out of your keyboard. Furthermore, the complexity of block devices provides a lot of room for such optimizations.

The topic of this chapter is how the kernel manages block devices and their requests. This part of the kernel is known as the **block I/O layer**.

### Anatomy of a Block Device

#### Sector *

The smallest addressable unit on a block device is a [**sector**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disk_sector). Sector sizes are powers of two, but 512 bytes is the most common size. The sector size is a physical property of the device, and the sector is the fundamental unit of all block devices; the device cannot address or operate on a unit smaller than the sector, although many block devices can operate on multiple sectors at one time. Most block devices have 512-byte sectors, although other sizes are common. For example, many CD-ROM discs have 2-kilobyte sectors.

#### Block *

The [**block**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Block_(data_storage)) is the smallest logically addressable unit for software.

The block is an abstraction of the filesystem; filesystems can be
accessed only in multiples of a block. Although the physical device is addressable at the
sector level, the kernel performs all disk operations in terms of blocks.

#### Block vs. Sector *

* The block size can be no smaller than the sector and must be a multiple of a sector, because the device’s smallest addressable unit is the sector.
* The kernel (as with hardware and the sector) needs the block to be a power of two.
* The kernel also requires that a block be no larger than the page size ([Chapter 12](ch12.md) and [Chapter 19](ch19.md)

Therefore, block sizes are a power-of-two multiple of the sector size and are not greater than the page size. Common block sizes are 512 bytes, 1 kilobyte, and 4 kilobytes.

##### **Confusion of block and sector** *

Some people confusingly refer to sectors and blocks with different names:

* Sectors, the smallest addressable unit to the device, are sometimes called "hard sectors" or "device blocks".
* Blocks, the smallest addressable unit to the filesystem, are sometimes referred to as "filesystem blocks" or "I/O blocks".

This chapter continues to call the two notions sectors and blocks, but you should keep these other terms in mind.

Hard disk related terminology, such as clusters, [cylinders](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cylinder-head-sector), and heads are specific only to certain block devices and are mostly invisible to user-space software. The reason that the sector is important to the kernel is because all device I/O must be done in units of sectors. In turn, blocks, which is the higher-level concept used by the kernel, are built on top of sectors.
