### **Chapter 12. TCP: The Transmission Control Protocol (Preliminaries)**

### Introduction

[p579]

The protocols discussed so far do not include mechanisms for delivering data reliably; they may detect that erroneous data has been received, using a checksum or CRC, but they do not try very hard to repair errors:

* With IP and UDP, no error repair is done at all.
* With Ethernet and other protocols based on it, the protocol provides some number of retries and then gives up if it cannot succeed.

##### **Information theory and coding theory**

* [**Error-correcting codes**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Error_detection_and_correction#Error-correcting_code) (adding redundant bits so that the real information can be retrieved even if some bits are damaged) is one way to correct communications problems is one very important method for handling errors.
* [**Automatic Repeat Request**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Error_detection_and_correction#Automatic_repeat_request_.28ARQ.29) (ARQ): which means "try sending again" until the information is finally received. This approach forms the basis for many communications protocols, including TCP.

#### ARQ and Retransmission

For a multihop communications channel, there are other problems besides packet bit errors:

* Problems that arise at an intermediate router
* Packet reordering
* Packet duplication
* Packet erasures (drops)

An error-correcting protocol designed for use over a multihop communications channel (such as IP) must cope with all of these problems.

A straightforward method dealing with packet drops (and bit errors) is to resend the packet until it is received properly. This requires a way to determine:

1. Whether the receiver has received the packet.
2. Whether the packet it received was the same one the sender sent.

[p580]

#### Windows of Packets and Sliding Windows

#### Variable Windows: Flow Control and Congestion Control

#### Setting the Retransmission Timeout

### Introduction to TCP

Our description of TCP starts in this chapter and continues in the next five chapters:

* Chapter 13: how a TCP connection is established and terminated.
* Chapter 14:
    * How TCP estimates the per-connection RTT.
    * How the retransmission timeout is set based on the above estimate.
* Chapter 15:
    * Normal transfer of data (starting with "interactive" applications, such as chat).
    * Window management and flow control, which apply to both interactive and "bulk" data flow applications (such as file transfer).
    * **Urgent mechanism** of TCP, which allows a sender to mark certain data in the data stream as special.
* Chapter 16:
    * Congestion control algorithms in TCP that help to reduce packet loss when the network is very busy.
    * Modifications that have been proposed to increase throughput on fast networks or improve resiliency on lossy (e.g., wireless) networks.
* Chapter 17: how TCP keeps connections active even when no data is flowing.

#### The TCP Service Model
