### **Chapter 15. Data Structures, Algorithms, and Code Simplification**

### `abc`
### `array`
### `bisect`
### `collections`
### `contextlib`

### `functools`

The [`functools`](https://docs.python.org/2/library/functools.html) module contains functions and decorators that are useful for creating higher-order functions, functional programming, and decorators.

#### `partial()` *

```text
partial(function [, *args [, **kwargs]])
```

The `partial()` function creates a function-like object, `partial`. When called, the `partial` object calls *function* with positional arguments *args*, keyword arguments *kwargs*, and any additional positional or keyword arguments that are supplied. Additional positional arguments are added to the end of *args*, and additional keyword arguments are merged into *kwargs*, overwriting any previously defined values (if any).

A typical use of `partial()` is when making a large number of function calls where many of the arguments are held fixed. For example:

```python
from functools import partial
mybutton = partial(Button, root, fg="black", bg="white", font="times", size="12")
b1 = mybutton(text="Ok") # Calls Button() with text="Ok" and all of the
b2 = mybutton(text="Cancel") # additional arguments supplied to partial() above
b3 = mybutton(text="Restart")
```

A `partial` instance `p` has the following attributes:

Item | Description
---- | -----------
`p.func` | Function that is called when `p` is called.
`p.args` | Tuple containing the leftmost positional arguments supplied to `p.func` when called. Additional positional arguments are concatenated to the end of this value.
`p.keywords` | Dictionary containing the keyword arguments supplied to `p.func` when called. Additional keyword arguments are merged into this dictionary.

<u>Note that a `partial` object does not behave exactly the same as a regular function. For instance, if you use `partial()` inside a class definition, it behaves like a static method, not an instance method.</u> [p268]

#### `reduce()` *

```text
reduce(function, items [, initial])
```

This function is the same as the [`reduce()`](https://docs.python.org/2/library/functions.html#reduce) function that was a built-in in Python 2. For future compatibility, use this version instead.

#### `update_wrapper()` *

```text
update_wrapper(wrapper, wrapped [, assigned [, updated]])
```

`update_wrapper()` is a utility function for writing decorators. It copies attributes from a function *wrapped* to a wrapper function *wrapper* in order to make the wrapped function look like the original function.

* *assigned* is a tuple of attribute names to copy and is set to `('__name__','__module__','__doc__')` by default.
* *updated* is a tuple containing the names of function attributes that are dictionaries and which you want values merged in the wrapper. By default, it is a tuple `('__dict__',)`.


#### `wraps()` *

```text
wraps(function [, assigned [, updated ]])
```

`wraps()` is a decorator which carries out the same task as `update_wrapper()` on the function to which it is applied. A typical use of this decorator is when writing other decorators. For example:

```python
from functools import wraps


def debug(func):
    @wraps(func)
    def wrapped(*args,**kwargs):
        print("Calling %s" % func.__name_)
        r = func(*args,**kwargs)
        print("Done calling %s" % func._name__)
    return wrapped


@debug
def add(x,y):
    return x+y
```

### `heapq`
### `itertools`
### `operator`
