### **Chapter 13. Daemon Processes**

### Introduction

Daemons are processes that are often started when the system is bootstrapped and terminate only when the system is shut down. Because they don’t
have a controlling terminal, they run in the background. UNIX systems have numerous daemons that perform day-to-day activities.

This chapter details the process structure of daemons and explores how to write a daemon. Since a daemon does not have a controlling terminal, we need to see how a daemon can report error conditions when something goes wrong.

### Daemon Characteristics

This section describes some common system daemons with the concepts of process groups, controlling terminals, and sessions as described in [Chapter 9](ch9.md).

```bash
ps -axj
```

* The `-a` option shows the status of processes owned by others.
* The `-x` option shows processes that don’t have a controlling terminal.
* The `-j` option displays the job-related information:
    * Session ID
    * Process group ID
    * Controlling terminal
    * [Terminal process group ID](ch9.md#terminal-process-group-id-tpgid-option-of-the-ps1-command)

The output from `ps` on Linux 3.2.0 looks like:

```
UID	PID	PPID	PGID	SID	TTY	CMD
root	1	0	1	1	?	/sbin/init
root	2	0	0	0	?	[kthreadd]
root	3	2	0	0	?	[ksoftirqd/0]
root	6	2	0	0	?	[migration/0]
root	7	2	0	0	?	[watchdog/0]
root	21	2	0	0	?	[cpuset]
root	22	2	0	0	?	[khelper]
root	26	2	0	0	?	[sync_supers]
root	27	2	0	0	?	[bdi-default]
root	29	2	0	0	?	[kblockd]
root	35	2	0	0	?	[kswapd0]
root	49	2	0	0	?	[scsi_eh_0]
root	256	2	0	0	?	[jbd2/sda5-8]
root	257	2	0	0	?	[ext4-dio-unwrit]
syslog	847	1	843	843	?	rsyslogd -c5
root	906	1	906	906	?	/usr/sbin/cupsd -F
root	1037	1	1037	1037	?	/usr/sbin/inetd
root	1067	1	1067	1067	?	cron
daemon	1068	1	1068	1068	?	atd
root	8196	1	8196	8196	?	/usr/sbin/sshd -D
root	13047	2	0	0	?	[kworker/1:0]
root	14596	2	0	0	?	[flush-8:0]
root	26464	1	26464	26464	?	rpcbind -w
statd	28490	1	28490	28490	?	rpc.statd -L
root	28553	2	0	0	?	[rpciod]
root	28554	2	0	0	?	[nfsiod]
root	28561	1	28561	28561	?	rpc.idmapd
root	28761	2	0	0	?	[lockd]
root	28764	2	0	0	?	[nfsd]
root	28775	1	28775	28775	?	/usr/sbin/rpc.mountd --manage-gids
```

The column headings, in order, are:

* User ID
* Process ID
* Parent process ID
* Process group ID
* Session ID
* Terminal name
* Command string

The system processes in this output depend on the operating system implementation. Anything with a parent process ID of 0 is usually a kernel process (started as part of the system bootstrap procedure), except `init`, which is a user-level command started by the kernel at boot time. Kernel processes are special and generally exist for the entire lifetime of the system. They run with superuser privileges and have no controlling terminal and no command line.

In the (above) sample `ps` output, kernel daemons has their names in square brackets.

* `kthreadd` is a special kernel process on Linux that creates other kernel process, and thus appears as the parent of other kernel daemons. A kernel component, which need to run in a process context but isn't invoked from the context of a user-level process, will usually have its own kernel daemon. For example:
    * `kswapd`: pageout daemon. It supports the virtual memory subsystem by writing dirty pages to disk slowly over time, so the pages can be reclaimed.
    * `flush`.
        * This daemon flushes dirty pages to disk when available memory reaches a configured minimum threshold.
        * It also flushes dirty pages back to disk at regular intervals to decrease data loss in the event of a system failure.
        * Several flush daemons can exist with one for each backing device. The sample output `flush-8:0` means the backing device is identified by its major device number (8) and its minor device number (0).
    * The `sync_supers` daemon periodically flushes file system metadata to disk.
    * The `jbd` daemon helps implement the journal in the `ext4` file system
* `init` (`launchd` on Mac OS X), usually Process 1, is a system daemon responsible for, among other things, starting system services specific to various run levels.
* `rpcbind` provides the service of [mapping RPC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portmap) (Remote Procedure Call) program numbers to network port numbers.
* The `nfsd`, `nfsiod`, `lockd`, `rpciod`, `rpc.idmapd`, `rpc.statd`, and `rpc.mountd` daemons provide support for the [Network File System](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_File_System) (NFS). Note that the first four are kernel daemons, while the last three are user-level daemons.
* `rsyslogd` can log system messages of any program. The messages may be printed on a console device and/or written to a file.
* `cron` executes commands at regularly scheduled dates and times. Numerous system administration tasks are handled by cron running programs at regularly intervals.
* `atd`, similar to `cron`, allows users to execute jobs at specified times, only once.
* `cupsd` is a print spooler that handles print requests on the system.
* `sshd` provides secure remote login and execution facilities.

Some notes:

* Most of the daemons run with superuser (root) privileges.
* None of the daemons has a controlling terminal: the terminal name is set to a question mark. The kernel daemons are started without a controlling terminal. The lack of a controlling terminal in the user-level daemons is probably the result of the daemons having called `setsid`. Most of the user-level daemons are process group leaders and session leaders, and are the only processes in their process group and session. (The one exception is `rsyslogd`.)
* The parent of the user-level daemons is the `init` process.

### Coding Rules

This section states basic rules to coding a daemon prevent unwanted interactions from happening, followed by a function `daemonize`, that implements these rules.

1. **Call `umask` to set the file mode creation mask** to a known value, usually 0.
    * If the daemon process creates files, it may want to set specific permissions.
    * On the other hand, if the daemon calls library functions that result in files being created, then it might make sense to set the file mode create mask to a more restrictive value (such as 007), since the library functions might not allow the caller to specify the permissions through an explicit argument.
2. **Call `fork` and have the parent `exit`**. This does several things:
    * If the daemon was started as a simple shell command, having the parent terminate makes the shell think that the command is done
    * The child inherits the process group ID of the parent but gets a new process ID, so we’re guaranteed that the child is not a process group leader. This is a prerequisite for the call to `setsid` that is done next. (See [Ensuring the successful call of setsid](ch9.md#ensuring-the-successful-call-of-setsid) in Chapter 9)
3. **Call `setsid` to create a new session**. The three steps listed in [Section 9.5](ch9.md#sessions) occur. The process:
    * becomes the leader of a new session,
    * becomes the leader of a new process group,
    * and is disassociated from its controlling terminal.

    Under System V–based systems, some people recommend calling `fork` again at this point, terminating the parent, and continuing the daemon in the child. This guarantees that the daemon is not a session leader, which prevents it from acquiring a controlling terminal under the System V rules ([Section 9.6](ch9.md#controlling-terminal)). Alternatively, to avoid acquiring a controlling terminal, be sure to specify `O_NOCTTY` whenever opening a terminal device.

4. **Change the current working directory to the root directory.** The current working directory inherited from the parent could be on a mounted file system.  Since daemons normally exist until the system is rebooted, if the daemon stays on a mounted file system, that file system cannot be unmounted.

    Alternatively, some daemons might change the current working directory to a specific location where they will do all their work. For example, a line printer spooling daemon might change its working directory to its spool directory.

5. **Unneeded file descriptors should be closed.** This prevents the daemon from holding open any descriptors that it may have inherited from its parent (which could be a shell or some other process). We can use our `open_max` function or the `getrlimit` function ([Section 7.11](ch7.md#getrlimit-and-setrlimit-functions)) to determine the highest descriptor and close all descriptors up to that value.
6. **Some daemons open file descriptors 0, 1, and 2 to `/dev/null`** so that any library routines that try to read from standard input or write to standard output or standard error will have no effect. [p466-467]

The code below shows the `daemonize` function that can be called from a program that wants to initialize itself as a daemon.

<small>[daemons/init.c](https://github.com/shichao-an/apue.3e/blob/master/daemons/init.c)</small>

```c
#include "apue.h"
#include <syslog.h>
#include <fcntl.h>
#include <sys/resource.h>

void
daemonize(const char *cmd)
{
	int i, fd0, fd1, fd2;
	pid_t pid;
	struct rlimit rl;
	struct sigaction sa;

	/*
	 * Clear file creation mask.
	 */
	umask(0);

	/*
	 * Get maximum number of file descriptors.
	 */
	if (getrlimit(RLIMIT_NOFILE, &rl) < 0)
		err_quit("%s: can't get file limit", cmd);

	/*
	 * Become a session leader to lose controlling TTY.
	 */
	if ((pid = fork()) < 0)
		err_quit("%s: can't fork", cmd);
	else if (pid != 0) /* parent */
		exit(0);
	setsid();

	/*
	 * Ensure future opens won't allocate controlling TTYs.
	 */
	sa.sa_handler = SIG_IGN;
	sigemptyset(&sa.sa_mask);
	sa.sa_flags = 0;
	if (sigaction(SIGHUP, &sa, NULL) < 0)
		err_quit("%s: can't ignore SIGHUP", cmd);
	if ((pid = fork()) < 0)
		err_quit("%s: can't fork", cmd);
	else if (pid != 0) /* parent */
		exit(0);

	/*
	 * Change the current working directory to the root so
	 * we won't prevent file systems from being unmounted.
	 */
	if (chdir("/") < 0)
		err_quit("%s: can't change directory to /", cmd);

	/*
	 * Close all open file descriptors.
	 */
	if (rl.rlim_max == RLIM_INFINITY)
		rl.rlim_max = 1024;
	for (i = 0; i < rl.rlim_max; i++)
		close(i);

	/*
	 * Attach file descriptors 0, 1, and 2 to /dev/null.
	 */
	fd0 = open("/dev/null", O_RDWR);
	fd1 = dup(0);
	fd2 = dup(0);

	/*
	 * Initialize the log file.
	 */
	openlog(cmd, LOG_CONS, LOG_DAEMON);
	if (fd0 != 0 || fd1 != 1 || fd2 != 2) {
		syslog(LOG_ERR, "unexpected file descriptors %d %d %d",
		  fd0, fd1, fd2);
		exit(1);
	}
}
```

If the `daemonize` function is called from a `main` program that then goes to sleep, we can check the status of the daemon with the `ps` command:

```shell-session
$ ./a.out
$ ps -efj
UID PID PPID PGID SID TTY CMD
sar 13800 1 13799 13799 ? ./a.out
$ ps -efj | grep 13799
sar 13800 1 13799 13799 ? ./a.out
```

We can also use ps to verify that no active process exists with ID 13799. This means that our daemon is in an orphaned process group and is not a session leader and, therefore, has no chance of allocating a controlling terminal. This is a result of performing the second `fork` in the `daemonize` function. We can see that our daemon has been initialized correctly.





### Error Logging
